Ask you transfer.
Robin Ham: Oh, I'll change my name as well. Cause
Edward Graham-Hyde: yeah, it's it's weird, isn't it? It does. It is
Edward Graham-Hyde: right? So basically the interview. I mean we calling it an interview. But the reality is that you'll I'll send the Transcript to you once it's ready. You can add to it. It's not like one of those fair tests, Phd, level research, where you can only take the data from the interview.
Edward Graham-Hyde: And it's much more about just collecting the right information. There's gonna be some key categories to go through. So we're gonna look at your context, your wider context.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Gonna look at a little bit about how you engage with the go through all strategy as a community, and some more specifics about your initiative and what you're doing. And then a bit of opportunity fees. Provide feedback to the diocese.
Edward Graham-Hyde: and then we'll have a little story collecting opportunity to kind of bolster some of the the got through all strategy with some stories of success, of what's happening in your community and the very end. We then got 2 really quick, single sentence questions around effective evangelism which links into my research here. I was okay.
Robin Ham: Right?
Edward Graham-Hyde: Great. Well.
Edward Graham-Hyde: first question, probably an easy one, but maybe a longer answer at the beginning, which is around, what does your context, whether it's probably defined? Your context is urban, your urban context, mean to you as a community?
Robin Ham: Yeah. So so I'm in Barrow in Furness. So Barrow is your second biggest sort of urban area in Cumbria. and we kind of
Robin Ham: yeah, I think in lots of ways. Barrow feels a little bit different to lots of Cumbria. So when people think of Cumbria, they think of rural often. or they think of tourism.
Robin Ham: And Barrow is kind of, yeah, is, isn't that so we are, yeah, historically, a working class town.
Robin Ham: and still very much
Robin Ham: yeah. Working town at the heartbeat of who we are. yeah, I've I've been here 8 and a half years. So
Robin Ham: it's funny in Cumbria. You have that phrase offcomer
Robin Ham: for people who come in. You're an offcomer, and I think people would say, actually, in Barrow, you're an offcomer with, you know. However, long you've been in the town. You're still, you know that you're not. You're new.
Robin Ham: Barrow is a yeah. A barrow is a place where it's, you know it's quite. It's learned to be quite independent. So because we're 45 min to the motorway
Robin Ham: because often it gets a bit of a bad press. Sometimes. people see it as a as a place of deprivation, I think often. Yeah, particularly. That comes from elsewhere in Cumbria. People might look down on it.
Robin Ham: So yeah, for those kind of reasons, it's a town that yeah, has learned to be quite independent, has quite strong sense of its own identity.
Robin Ham: may be slightly suspicious of when stuff comes from outside. You know what's the hidden motive?
Robin Ham: Lots of agencies and services kind of come to Barrow to help barrow
Robin Ham: and so that can lead to sort of suspicion. and yet, yeah, people have a have a great sense of pride about the town, even if they might. You know they can joke about the town. They're the ones who are allowed to kind of go.
Robin Ham: Oh, yeah, it's a sult or whatever we wanna get, get out.
Robin Ham: they are actually proud of what Barra brings in terms of, okay, yeah, we're building nuclear submarines nowhere else in the UK is doing that. And also, yeah, there's something about our community that is kind of.
Robin Ham: yeah, this this kind of that community spirit, and identity that other places.
Robin Ham: maybe answer stronger. So yeah, I think when we first came tomorrow, like, we thought a lot of people would be wanting to get out. And you do kinda get that narrative. Particularly amongst teenagers. But we also found there's a lot of people who come back in their late twenties or thirties to have their families, because they know they're gonna get a job at Bae, and they can have a nice life.
Robin Ham:  so yeah, I guess urban town, strong sense of community in lots of ways. Big village feel lots of people with deep roots. Multi generations go going back.
Robin Ham: Yeah.
Robin Ham: And yet also, kind of yeah, we we see ourselves as as a, as a. as a town, with something to offer as well, I guess to to the nation in the sense of we are doing something that
Robin Ham: is of significance with the submarines. Basically.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Okay, unpack. I'm particularly
Edward Graham-Hyde: sounds kind of the pride that comes from being a is that
Robin Ham: naturally, then, that will probably have some impact on your strategy for the Gospel. I'm wondering if you could unpack that a bit. How's it impacted your strategy for the gospel as a as a church? Yeah. So I think
Robin Ham: one of the things that I've kind of come to over the over the years over the years is sort of that sense of wanting to go with the grain of the place.
Robin Ham: and that's been a phrase I've found quite helpful.
Robin Ham: So actually,
Robin Ham: again, this idea of importing something. Obviously, often you get in like
Robin Ham: acts, or whatever you kind of. Okay, we are taking the gospel 2 places. And obviously, there's there's always a sense in which, when you you are bringing a message to people. But actually, you wanna go go with the grain of of the place and you wanna appreciate you wanna appreciate the story of the place. And actually the story of Christianity in that place. If it's a place that has had exposure to the Gospel which obviously Barrow has
Robin Ham: being in the Uk,
Robin Ham: so I think, yeah. wanting to make sure that that anything I do as someone who is coming in
Robin Ham: is kind of
Robin Ham: appreciative of what is going on. I guess, like, I guess, kind of contextualization stuff. But
Robin Ham: yeah, goes with the grain in terms of the story of Christianity in this place, and and in terms of the the values of the culture. So
Robin Ham: not trying to be the expert who's offering something new?
Robin Ham: But actually, yeah, where is
Robin Ham: where is God? Up to? What's God doing in this place? How do we sort of join in with it? I guess, in kind of classic mission language.
Robin Ham: Yeah. And and I guess, being mindful of how our percept, what perception of what we're doing is all the time. So what's the perception of the ministry
Robin Ham: of the Church in terms of
Robin Ham: it not being distinct from
Robin Ham: those kind of the web, the community web in the place. If that makes sense. So it's not that we. you know, even now, with obviously went through a church. Plans, can talk about that, and then merge with a parish church in in the last 3 years.
Robin Ham: But even now, with the parish church, we're still, you know, you're still trying to make sure that actually the the Christian folk who are involved in the church are very much enmeshed in the community rather than seeing the ministry of the Church as separate.
Robin Ham: it does. And every kind of practice of evangelism level. What does that actually look like in terms? What you do?
Robin Ham: So I guess.
Robin Ham: Yeah. Speaking very for myself as an individual, and I guess, with my sort of
Robin Ham: pass, pass the hat on. You know I am wanting to make sure that I am
Robin Ham: immersed in the community. So I am.
Robin Ham: there at the school gate with our kids and and getting involved in local activities that aren't church activities. So just very consciously.
Robin Ham: making sure that I'm I'm part of the same things that other people are. Part of.
Robin Ham: I'm yeah off. Yeah. I think, in a place like Barrow that can that can take some time. Because you're aware that yeah, people might have. And 3 generation deep sort of contacts and and webs.
Robin Ham: but I you know what for me. One of the sort of most significant things in the last few years is sort of helping
Robin Ham: to coach a football team for my for my son. And and just the way that actually, that
Robin Ham: that kind of the natural rhythms of town life. Okay, play sport be involved in
Robin Ham: football, whatever you know that, make sure you are part of those kind of rhythms and patterns of society. In the town. And I think that then just
Robin Ham: helps people see that your not trying to do something in in a kind of spiritual silo
Robin Ham: so I guess that's one example. I guess at a more church level. So more like in terms of what we're encouraging people.
Robin Ham: you know, just being big on some of the like Licc stuff on like front lines and making sure that that's a kind of a clear articulation of of how we live out. Our faith is to be
Robin Ham: a blessing to our town on our front lines, and that's very much that is part of your Christian walk. That is part of your Christian mission. And it's not that the church is trying to suck you out of all your
Robin Ham: contacts.
Robin Ham: And you're kind of yeah.  the way in which you know, you've grown up in this place. So actually, yeah, course, we want you to be stuck in.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Yeah, I don't know if that's getting getting practical or concrete enough. Yeah, no, no, it's it's very much you led in a way, and that's now as we'll say. I've got a question here around.
Edward Graham-Hyde: what else is important to know about your context? Obviously, let's start with the fact that it is a merger
Robin Ham: and what that looks like for you. W. What should we know about that and really treat us like layman's? Here? We we we don't know. Yeah. So I guess. Yeah, I'll store my my story. My wife and I story is that we saw a pioneer curacy advertised back in 2,014.
Robin Ham: So the Bishop apparently had said there was a bit of a trend at that time of having pioneer curates. I think there was 3 of those, maybe 2 of them in the year above me, in in the diocese.
Robin Ham: and the Bishop had created another one in in my ear. And so
Robin Ham: the my training minister, who was basically offered this role by the Bishop sort of looked around at the town and said, Okay, what could we do? And there was a few different options.
Robin Ham: And so when I came to visit and sort of for interview effectively
Robin Ham: there was a kind of a suburb of the town called Ruse and Holbeck, which is where the town has kind of expanded
Robin Ham: with housing into sort of what were separate villages. They'd identified that actually, one of the parishes stretched from Town Centre to this kind of edge of parish, and actually the parish church was in the centre, and this kind of residential
Robin Ham: suburb, a lot of owner occupied housing wasn't really being engaged with.
Robin Ham: So they bought a house in there. And basically we came, and and in 2015,
Robin Ham: with a view to planting something in some way in that part of the town. so that. Yeah, I guess. Yeah, giving you a lot of detail here. But basically.
Robin Ham: you know, we, I think we really realize quickly as a couple when I say we, that the kind of the categories of planting that we had been part of in the past.
Robin Ham: whether it be in London or in Cheltenham.
Robin Ham: We're very much often, like a ready made good to go. Congregation, you know, start launch team.
Robin Ham: either starting a new congregation within an existing building or parish, or
Robin Ham: a new church, and and that wasn't going to happen here
Robin Ham: any time soon, because certainly the parish church that I was connected with with my curacy where my minister was looking after.
Robin Ham: They were not in a place. I think he would say in some way he had gone into what he would probably call a turn around situation, trying to in some sense revitalize.
Robin Ham: and so they were never going to send a bunch of people.
So it was very much shining.
Robin Ham: Get involved in that part of the town where we were living. Pray with Christians who lived in that part of the town, but went elsewhere to church. and pretty much we did
Robin Ham: we did a year of praying and meeting. We ran like a Lent group in in a home and tried to connect with a few people that way. We ran a evangelistic course called wonderfully made for Mums
Robin Ham:  After a year of doing that we had a year. We then started a Sunday afternoon gathering in a local school
Robin Ham: which met every 2, 3 weeks, which I guess I'd describe as like a bit like alpha. But with a kids group
Robin Ham:  and that was kind of like, a yeah, 2, 3 week thing. And then, after a year of doing that in the school, we then said, Okay, we've got a. We've kind of gathered a few people.
Robin Ham: some of whom were Christians, involved in other churches, but who had a heart for that area.
Robin Ham: some of whom were kind of on the edge of faith.
Robin Ham:  and one of the things, yeah, we just felt, basically, okay, actually, we're missing something by not being identifying as a weekly church congregation.
Robin Ham: And so we're gonna take this this kind of step of going. Okay, let's make ourselves weekly. We'll start calling ourselves Gracechurch and Grace Church barrow.
Robin Ham: And so we went for it Sunday afternoons for a year.
Robin Ham: And that was good like. But again we were kind of
Robin Ham: we, you know we'd run Christmas stuff carol services for the community. We ran other courses.
Robin Ham:  but you know, we were always really small. We were maybe you know, we might be between 12 and 25 people, including children on a Sunday
Robin Ham: and one of the things we came kept coming up against is actually lots of the the non-christian folk or folk who wouldn't identify as as church goers who were interested in finding out more was saying. Sunday afternoons isn't great for us, because that's when we hang out with family. That's when we go and see the grandparents.
Robin Ham: Sunday sort of dinner, Sunday lunch being a kind of a big connection point families.
Robin Ham: So after a year of doing that, we actually shifted to a morning and we moved to a slightly different venue, a Working Men's Club, because it gave us a bit more flexibility. It was a bit more cozier
Robin Ham:  and had a year of that. No one that yeah, no, we had basically had 18 months of that had had.
Robin Ham: I was kind of enjoying that year. I transitioned from pioneer curate to pioneer minister. So the curacy kind of ended, and they put Bishop appointed me as a kind of a pioneer minister to lead that
Robin Ham: church plant.
Robin Ham: We were. Yeah, we were slightly bigger than
Robin Ham: but again, it was still very kind of yeah. Small scale, starting from scratch. Kind of thing.
Robin Ham: but yeah, had an you know, had amazing some amazing moments. Had had a 4 guys baptized on East to Sunday 2019, which was really kind of special in in a kind of baps history out the back on this Bowling Green
Edward Graham-Hyde: by the Working Men's club.
Robin Ham:  But one of the things that happened to us in the summer around September 20,
Robin Ham: 2019, just after that is, 6 adults who were kind of involved in stuff, all left Barrow for different reasons. So one was an intern who was only here for a year, but then the others were all
Robin Ham: in some form of employment, or couple with someone else who was employed. And and they basically all moved away at different points within about 3 months.
Robin Ham: So we had this meeting of the core team in January 2020 where we were like, yeah, this is becoming quite hard, like we've kind of our
Robin Ham: in terms of our core core mass.
Robin Ham: Critical mass was struggling
Robin Ham: on a Sunday and that almost seems like it's affecting people's.
Robin Ham:  people sticking with it because they don't quite. We almost too small to be sort of a viable
Robin Ham: gathering points. The building went through a change of management as well, which meant we were not able to use it as much midweek as we'd wanted to.
Robin Ham: And yeah, basically, they were wanting to kind of push us out, really, because we weren't financially bringing them in. And they basically had to bring in a couple to run the Working Men's club as a bar. And so this couple were like, well, you're not gaining us any pints. So
Robin Ham:  I think. Yeah, we knew that something had to change. This is January 2020. And of course, then everything did change, hey? And in lots of ways. That was a real gift to us to have kind of lockdown because it meant it gave us the space to to rethink.
Robin Ham: Obviously, front door becomes online world. And we did a lot of stuff online. And and as everyone did sort of adapted to that.
Robin Ham: But basically one of the things we began exploring in. Probably in the May there was a parish in an barrow, basically has 8 parishes.
Robin Ham: It's that kind of size. So one of the parishes. Was in a vacancy. There's a church that had an evangelical history.
Robin Ham: Ha! Had a really good building, had some great people, but basically, the diocese had said that wasn't money for a replacement
Robin Ham: and they'd been relying on an associate minister part time.
Robin Ham: So we just it just gave us the space to go. Actually, maybe there's something in emerging. Maybe that's the wise thing for the next step of this journey, for everyone, for both churches, but also for the town
Robin Ham: and so went through this whole merger process, which was completely new to us all, and didn't really have anywhere to go to. Kind of work out how to do that, but we kind of
Robin Ham: work, figured it out, and worked our way through sort of thing. And got to the point
Robin Ham: whereby, in the November we both Church is given a green light. To this I was then licenses, basically the the incumbent off the parish, which was called St. Paul's.
Robin Ham: It's about a 6 min drive from where we were meeting to the parish church, and we found that actually most of the people who were involved in the church plants were happy with that, because actually, 6 min in the car in Barrow is nothing.
Robin Ham:  And actually, one of the things was that the people we were reaching in that part of town were people who were actually relatively mobile. So for them, it wasn't a distinct community that necessarily needed that physical church on the street
Robin Ham: cause. They were happy to get in the car, to go to the gym, or to go to work or whatever.
Robin Ham:  so yeah, so that's basically been an interesting journey. And basically the last
Robin Ham: sort of yeah, I guess since January 2021, which is when I was. I think, officially licensed.
Robin Ham: It's kind of been about, okay, how do we? How do we keep going in this merger? How do we try and make sure we have one identity. But we're not simply an amalgamation into the parish, but that the plant brings something and something of its story. That means we've got that kind of
Robin Ham: missional thinking.
Robin Ham: yeah, I've talked a lot there, but really, really helpful.
Edward Graham-Hyde: yeah. So obviously, you define as church plan. And well, I'm assuming you do, rather than a fresh expression or anything else.
Edward Graham-Hyde: There are advantages and disadvantages that come to that. I'm just wondering if you had any reflections on what those advantages and disadvantages of being defined as a church plant, both within your diocese, but also generally has been.
Robin Ham: Yeah. It's been a really interesting thing over the last 8 years, because there was this kind of category of pioneer curates, and they were all kind of expected to pioneer in some way.
Robin Ham: And I think when the dioces first did that, they didn't really know what to do with
Robin Ham: them, they thought, this is a good idea. But okay, what do we do? So we were actually sent to be coached by a guy from Wigan. Who kind of had the experience, and that was that was a happy time for a year sort of thing, but I think it probably showed that the dioces didn't really know what to do. Then, I think, yeah, we had, like Richard Passmore appointed. With kind of fresh expressions, lead.
Robin Ham: And I think, yeah, for me, like my background was always in the language of church planting and that would be my kind of natural go to.
Robin Ham: and I think, probably bound up with that
Robin Ham: is probably kind of more
Robin Ham: clear
Robin Ham: goals in terms of the the sense of a kind of a an ecclesial community that
Robin Ham: looks like church in some way that that is willing to ask questions and do church outside the box, but probably has some fairly defined kind of theological categories for what
Robin Ham: it should look like, or at least what the core convictions behind, whatever it looks like, are
Robin Ham: whereas I think fresh expressions probably has felt in the dice is a little bit more vague.
Robin Ham:  and and question marks maybe about the place of discipleship.
Robin Ham:  within that. So
Robin Ham: I think calling ourselves a church plant, has been helpful in some ways, because it's also given us clarity with local people as to what we're trying to be about. We are.
Robin Ham: This is trying to be church. And that's something. Okay. They know what church is. But this is clearly different. But okay, that's okay. Because I know it's meant to be church, even though there are those differences.
Robin Ham: But I think there probably has been a sense of the narrative in Co. In Cumbria has been around fresh expressions. and so those who have been involved in church planting have maybe, or used that language more have kind of not necessarily
Robin Ham: have. Yeah. Struggled to kind of I don't know. Maybe fit in, or certainly sort of get support. So
Robin Ham: yeah, for my, I think for years, the first year of the church plant, I ended up doing a course in Manchester on church planting, because the diocese sort of recognized that there wasn't really any
Robin Ham: anyone really doing it within the diocese
Robin Ham: and calling it that
Robin Ham: And and yeah, that there were, there were maybe differences with with the fresh expressions training and input.
Robin Ham: As to what I was doing?
Edward Graham-Hyde: Okay? Yeah. So helpful.
Edward Graham-Hyde: similar question. But more round, what does being in the diocese of Carlyle bring in terms of advantages, disadvantages to you as a church plant.
Robin Ham: So I think
Robin Ham: that I mean, obviously, lots of people will say Cumbria is massive, and so it's a hard, although it's a small diocese in terms of people and personalities. It's a big diocese in terms of actually seeing people and feeling connected. I think.
Robin Ham: being part of an Anglican diocese. I don't know I did. That being part being part of the Anglican diocese has been helpful in terms of locally just people knowing you're you're an ordained minister.
Robin Ham: I think, has brought brought weight
Robin Ham: particularly because it's okay. You're you are Anglican, your Church of England, but your church planting. So okay, II do get you more.
Robin Ham: I'm willing for you to come into the school and do assemblies.
Robin Ham: yeah, II see this is part of the Church of England's kind of mission
Robin Ham: and resourcing in the town. So I think it's helped people to see.
Robin Ham: Yeah, give me a kind of a legitimacy. and I think in terms of the dioces. Probably it's been more about individual support. So, for example, the previous Bishop, Bishop James
Robin Ham: was personally really supportive. I guess I always knew that it was him who'd sort of. you know, come up with the idea of the curacy. It was him who then
Robin Ham: sort of talked with my training incumbent, and basically was happy to give the green light to the pioneer minister role
Robin Ham: beyond the curacy.
Robin Ham: It was him who was then kind of very happy for us to explore the merger.
Robin Ham: So I guess I always have found there's been that relational support.
Robin Ham: Not necessarily that kind of like. Okay, our expertise or I get you. And you know this is all part of a big strategy, but
Robin Ham: at least the kind of a
Robin Ham: I'm happy to bless what you're doing sort of thing, even though it's a bit different.
Robin Ham: I think that would probably be the big thing. Because I think, actually, yeah, there hasn't been that web of church planting thinking within the diocese.
Robin Ham: So that's not been something that we've kind of benefited from
Robin Ham: And I think probably
Robin Ham: maybe a personal level again. Yeah, it became clear that the fresh expressions thing was quite different and therefore wasn't gonna be a natural kind of fit
Robin Ham: in terms of support networks.
Robin Ham: For what we were doing.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Yeah. very good. And
Robin Ham: have any more questions in that kind of context field. It's more around. Let's zoom in zooming more into the golf rule strategy stuff, then.
Edward Graham-Hyde: So
Edward Graham-Hyde: yep, dog rule strategy. It's a big vision. I think. Big got quite a few values that come out of it as well. I'm just wondering how's the strategy impacted your community at all. What is it? Or is it more, you know.
Edward Graham-Hyde: with you as a leadership team? Has it impacted the whole community. What does the Godfrey strategy look like for you guys?
Robin Ham: And by strategy are we talking about the more kind of recent kind of
Robin Ham: yeah, definition of it. So yeah. Cause, I guess when got roll was first launched, it was kind of like, okay, I think a lot of people just felt, okay.
Robin Ham: brilliant. But this is what the church is about, anyway. Right? This is about reaching everyone. I think? Yeah. So
Robin Ham: obviously, I think when the yeah, the strategy was sort of relaunched with specific strands to it. That was in the context of the merger. So post covid.  So I think in lots of ways it
Robin Ham: in some ways. Yet it has helped give clear focus. So, for example, that was the growing younger element of the strategy.
Robin Ham: And so
Robin Ham: one of the things we were doing locally as part of the new identity of the church was, what are our going to be our vision priorities as a church.
Robin Ham: And so we ended up one of those choosing one of those to be growing younger, and that was partly because we knew it was a diocesan
Robin Ham: part of the dust and strategy. And so it felt like, this is, this is buying into that. And it's kind of showing how it yeah works out on the ground.
Robin Ham: But also, I think, yeah, trying to say to the diocese again, we want to take this seriously.
Robin Ham:  I think. you know. Yeah, I guess part of the the dicey stuff has been about the mixed ecology. Different kinds of church.
Robin Ham: fresh expressions and time-honored. And so I think again, that's kind of helpfully recognise that. Yeah, maybe our story is a bit of a funny story, but it it kind of can. It's valued within that.
Robin Ham:  But to be honest, I don't think beyond that
Robin Ham: much.
Robin Ham:  yeah. Reality.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Yeah. So you told, yeah, you told a little bit about implementation in there which I think probably covered that question around how you're implementing it, and I guess more of an even better if about the strategy, if you had one. If you have any, doesn't matter if you don't
Robin Ham: say again, if if a a
Edward Graham-Hyde: like an even better, I'm a I'm a former teacher, I should say so. That kind of what went well, even better. If, when you mark even better, if about the god through all strategy.
Robin Ham:  yeah. So my own sort of feeling would be that when we re looked at the strategy
Robin Ham: we we have. We haven't been ruthless enough.
Robin Ham: So I think lots of people initially felt. Okay, golf role is just it's blanket. And it's a good heading. And we've got this 4 kind of themes. you know. Tread gently, speak boldly.
Robin Ham: follow daily. Care deeply. Okay, but that's still quite broad and isn't really a strategy. Okay? Then we came up with the the different elements of the new strategy. But we haven't actually been
Robin Ham: ruthless in in that. It still feels like it's basically we're coming up with a
Robin Ham: a label and a strategy that covers everything rather than actually focusing us  and helping us make
Robin Ham: harder decisions on the ground.
Robin Ham: So I think, yeah, at a local level. And Barrow, as we look at kind of the church scene and the mission community.
Robin Ham: that strategy hasn't really helped us
Robin Ham: be ruthless or be kind of
Robin Ham: strategic in terms of the decisions we are making. It feels like it's still a kind of it's a way of letting everything carry on to exist. But just acknowledging there's a lot of things existing
Edward Graham-Hyde: if that makes sense. Yeah, yeah, specifics is kind of the next section. Zooming again, a little bit more
Robin Ham: into what you guys are. And actually, this question is more to you as the leader in what success looks like to you in your context.
Robin Ham: So I think.
Robin Ham:  I think I often think about success in terms of individuals
Robin Ham: growing in their faith. But those individuals being being people who are enmeshed in their community.
Robin Ham: and that therefore, having ripples of of impact.
Robin Ham: So
Robin Ham: yeah, I guess that's
Robin Ham: one of the things I kind of I value. And one of the things II you know, I hope for. What we're doing at the moment is that actually
Robin Ham: were not just trying to gather a crowd under the banner of St. Paul's Barrow. Whether we are that? Yeah, the individual people are being are growing, but they're then being sent out onto their front lines, and
Robin Ham: and because they are rooted in the town already, they are then having an impact.
Robin Ham: So they're sharing the gospel or there talking more about their faith with with colleagues or family or  because I think probably there is.
Robin Ham: There's always that. I guess it's the same in lots of places. But there's that danger where you measure, change by the clergy and what they are achieving and doing.
Robin Ham: or even the kind of the programs that the clergy are doing at the church.
Robin Ham: but I think in terms of the success stories. You know that as I look at what
Robin Ham: the last 8 years and what we've been privileged to be involved in it is it's individuals who are who are, who, yeah, maybe identified as Christian. And you've just sort of helped them to kind of
Robin Ham: Owen, that faith
Robin Ham: publicly or people who've come to faith. And then a kind of that's causing surprise and reaction, and other people being drawn in.
Robin Ham: That's the kind of the success. Yeah.
Edward Graham-Hyde: And yeah, I mean, naturally, when you ask a question about success, you'd follow along with what challenges have you faced? But I feel like, unless there's anything additional feel like you've covered a lot around the challenges that you face.
Edward Graham-Hyde: You know, pre post Covid. I don't know if there's like individual things that you might draw on, or yeah,
Robin Ham: I mean, I think one of the things that personally, we've had to kind of process is like, well.
Robin Ham: what does
Robin Ham: church planting looked like in a place like Barrow.
Robin Ham: where roots go deep and where you don't have lots of resources. And in some ways, yeah, the last 8 years that has been the
Robin Ham: that's been the story of the last 8 years, and we are. We are where we are sort of thing.
Robin Ham: so, and I think I guess I probably felt 8 years ago that I there wasn't many places to turn. or I didn't know where to turn 4
Robin Ham: kind of guidance on that.
Robin Ham: I felt those lots of places to turn. If I wanted to start a new congregation in the city, and I had 25 people to start it with me.
Robin Ham: but yeah, yeah. So I think that's probably been the big challenge.
Robin Ham: yeah, we've had to work through
Edward Graham-Hyde:  bit of a cheeky question is because speaking as a church plan. So I know that this is always bit like, no, wouldn't change anything. We're doing really well. But if there's anything you would change, maybe you know that you started building in right from the beginning that has kind of just permeated through. About what you're doing. If there's anything you change about your church plan, what would it be? And why?
Robin Ham: Yeah, that's a great question.
Robin Ham: it's weird. Because we've kind of yeah, yeah, you kind of, I guess. Big picture like stuff. We, you know we've we've kind of it. Felt it felt like we kind of just
Robin Ham: sort of taken steps along the way, and we've ended up where we are, and we didn't know really know where we were going.
Robin Ham: but we sort of trust God in that process, and I think generally that it would have been difficult to do anything apart from that.
Robin Ham:  I think.
Robin Ham:  I think there's always a thing about like
Robin Ham: making sure that my time is invested into the local community into normal relationships.
Robin Ham: And
Robin Ham: and I think, like.
Robin Ham: in our situation with the time limits of the curacy, there was always that kind of pressure to get to the point where you could call something a church
Robin Ham: and
Robin Ham: maybe the price of that in terms of energy and time is.
Robin Ham: how much time and energy is it taking away from investing in just normal relationships?
Robin Ham:  and I think certainly since the merger there's then been, that's that's probably look slightly differently.
Robin Ham: It's more look like
Robin Ham: the the the institution church is a parish.
Robin Ham: Take so much time. and therefore how much
Robin Ham: time is being squeezed away from actually.
Robin Ham: yeah, relationship with people outside church.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Yeah.
Robin Ham: I hear you. I can't hear you
Edward Graham-Hyde: in terms of other church plants and initiatives within the diocese, and maybe even outside, what could they learn from you specifically as a church plant?
Robin Ham: Yeah, I mean, yeah. When when we talked about when we first, when I first heard that they were bidding for this?
Robin Ham: The church planting kind of brief. Brief? Okay? Yeah. I guess my ears did prick up because it felt slightly like, Okay, wow.
Robin Ham: we've been doing this for in 8 for 8 years in Cumbria.
Robin Ham: But it doesn't really feel like we've been asked like, Okay, how did you find it? And what should this look like?
Robin Ham:  like, I think.
Robin Ham: yeah, it's the recognition that roots go deep in Cumbria. And so it needs to be something. It needs to go with the grain. It takes time. Because relationships take time.
Robin Ham:  I think. Yeah, it's interesting that I think there's always that kind of that idea that church planting is. You can just magically bring people in.
Robin Ham: And even over the last 3, 4 years there's been that question around Barrow. Like is the solution to get a resource church from somewhere else in the North West to send a bunch of people
Robin Ham: the barrow.
Robin Ham: but just yeah.
Robin Ham: Not necessarily convinced that that is going to be
Robin Ham: the thing that has a lasting impact.
Robin Ham: I guess the value of the existing sort of
Robin Ham: spiritual locations, church buildings.
Robin Ham:  and and just being given time and energy to invest.
Robin Ham: whilst also having, I would say, quite, yeah, quite focused kind of categories
Robin Ham: in terms of thinking about what you're doing and what you're trying to achieve.
Robin Ham: Yeah, I didn't feel I've necessarily settled. I could say that. But no. Well, let me press you a bit further, because that's really interesting. You saying, you know you've you've resisted the temptation of having a resource church just parachute a bunch of people, and
Edward Graham-Hyde: maybe I'm reflecting on. Maybe it's a bit more evangelical in my experience. But
Edward Graham-Hyde: bodies on the ground, you know. That's that's what every church plaster wants. So
Edward Graham-Hyde: on a practical level. How are you then.
Edward Graham-Hyde: getting the most out of the people you've got, rather than saying yes to bringing more people in. What is it you do with them?
Robin Ham: And you know we but we probably have said yes in little ways. So we've you know we've received in turns. We've
Robin Ham: you know we would give
Robin Ham: given a cure it so I guess I have seen that in little ways.
Robin Ham: and we've had the benefit of Christians who've moved into the area
Robin Ham: being involved. But I guess it's that sense of being confident that that that is working with the existing
Robin Ham: and
Robin Ham: and all the stuff around. Therefore, how? How the church is perceived in the community. Just that. I guess that feeling really important and precious.
Robin Ham:  and and it not just being about
Robin Ham: gathering a crowd or being
Robin Ham: kind of the a show in town. Sort of thing.  what? What?
Edward Graham-Hyde: if you have to put a percentage to it? What percentage split to people who've moved in
Edward Graham-Hyde: to local people who've grown up there or grown up, and then returned. And have you got any church?
Robin Ham: It's a great question.
Robin Ham: I? Well, yeah. So it's funny, because actually, you'd be surprised how many people
Robin Ham: even who've been around in Barrow for 40 50 years
Robin Ham: at 1 point weren't in Barrow. So amongst the key members of the church, I still think.
Robin Ham: although there's people who've been involved, for example, in Saint Paul's as a parish, for. be, as I say 30, 40 years.
Robin Ham: maybe even more turns out they they, they move to borrow for a job.
Robin Ham: So I think that
Robin Ham: yeah part of me again, going back to these success. You know the success stories.
Robin Ham: Pardon me. Still go. It kind of goes. Okay? Well, actually. it feels like we're not scratching the surface
Robin Ham: in terms of actual local people whose
Robin Ham: commitment? Who? Yeah, who generationally go back?
Robin Ham:  So?
Robin Ham: I mean, yeah. In terms of the the St. Paul's church congregation?
Robin Ham: I mean, probably there'd be maybe like
Robin Ham: then I
Robin Ham: 30% who who've come to Barrow in the last 5 years?
Robin Ham: Which maybe is quite high. But then, if you ask, yeah, who's been in Barrow who was born in Barrow?
Robin Ham: I don't know for sure. But I wonder if it maybe is even as high as like 80% weren't born in Barrow.
Edward Graham-Hyde: I am.
Robin Ham: So
Robin Ham: I wonder if I wonder if there's a
Robin Ham: a thing there about just historically, how? Well with
Robin Ham: connected and
Robin Ham: or just what? Yeah, what?
Robin Ham: How borough people think of church?
Robin Ham: that I guess we're starting to maybe
Robin Ham: break down and challenge. I don't know. Yeah.
Edward Graham-Hyde: okay, so okay, sounds complex. Maybe these research. Okay?
Edward Graham-Hyde: yeah. The question bit of a different topic. But still within, I guess. Fitting to to go through stuff as well a little bit. What new ways, if it's all, if you've managed to. I know it's you know everyone's sort of coming out of Covid and starting again. Almost have you created in terms of reaching a diverse and younger people?
Robin Ham: Hmm.
Robin Ham: so
Robin Ham: we at Simple's. We basically yeah. One of the first things we did, I guess, after the merger and after Covid is, we came up with these vision priorities. And one of them being growing younger.
Robin Ham: So that has kind of
Robin Ham: we've been trying to implement that in different ways. So we started. Well, we yeah, it had had some historical form.
Robin Ham: But we changed it quite differently. II basically young people's drop in after school. So our location as a church building is on to kind of a crossroads with 2 kind of main roads. So
Robin Ham: trying to basically recognize that actually, the people who we we've got a lot of kids in primary school who are part of the church community through parents or grandparents, but
Robin Ham: very few secondary. So we we just we need to just make contacts really rather than
Robin Ham: through existing relationships. and
Robin Ham: yes, trying to basically re ignite schools. Ministry. So
a presence
Robin Ham: in in the church school at least. But then.
Robin Ham: yeah, trying to
Robin Ham: pick up on basically classic things like assemblies. In in the local schools.
Robin Ham:  try and run a termly
Robin Ham: event that's aimed at families on like a Saturday or a Friday evening
Robin Ham: as a kind of an evangelistic thing. So whether that's a pancake party, or we're doing
Robin Ham: a light party coming up those kind of obvious kind of feeder
Robin Ham: events.
Robin Ham: one of the things that we're about to launch now, so I guess it's been a few months in the pipeline is.
Robin Ham: As I said, we've got a number of people who are in upper years of primary school, so trying to put something on that is like a a a group for them, but for them to invite their friends to
Robin Ham: midweek. so like, and like an evening
Robin Ham: kind of discipleship group, but slightly like an evangelistic group as well. So going well, these are the young people we've got. How do we help them to reach out to their friends? But also build them up in the face.
Robin Ham: So that's about to go live in a couple of weeks after half term.
Robin Ham: diverse like, I guess generally we've been trying to just be big on Everyone's welcome. Nobody's perfect with Jesus. There's always hope that's our kind of
Robin Ham: kind of slogan.
Robin Ham: So tryin to get behind the idea that you only expect certain people to come to church every Sunday is a Sunday where you can invite someone.
Robin Ham: We wanna expect people to be there. Therefore we're gonna run
Robin Ham: that alpha or Cristan is explored regularly.
Robin Ham:  we are. Yeah, I mean, I guess I don't know if these are all obvious things. But so even our like, our discipleship groups.
Robin Ham: home groups.
Robin Ham: we follow a 1, 2, 3 go pattern. So we meet 1, one and 3, and then we pray week, 2, and then week 4. We just say make space for actually hanging out with your non Christian friends.
Robin Ham: So we're just trying to build that into the culture.
Robin Ham:  I think, yeah, it's interesting. II think that they were massively diverse as a congregation. But
Robin Ham: there's definitely people who you might not think see, particularly churchy, etc., and it's trying to just celebrate that and make sure those voices are seen and heard.
Robin Ham:  we've yeah, we I mean, one of the interesting things actually, in the last year has been again, not really through anything of our doing is we've had a bunch of Iranian guys turn up because one had a personal contact with
Robin Ham: I knew of a pastor who knew me, and this one of the guys had moved from another town and Barrow Hotel suddenly started being a government sort of holding place. And so that's helped us kind of be diverse for a year. But we've not. We've not really. We didn't really do anything to
Robin Ham: to to make that happen, but I guess we've had to then adapt to go work out. If we are this diverse, how do we make sure we are this diverse in terms of
Robin Ham: involving them?
Robin Ham: yeah.
Edward Graham-Hyde: So so there's lots there, there's you know. Most people know that when you bring in initiatives, when you kind of do things that are analystically focused, that also develops the people involved in them, that you're up there in your community.
Edward Graham-Hyde: any kind of initial big developments or kind of in people in your community around create additional practice that, you see is, is it changes the dynamic a little bit? Is there more energy? Or is it less energy? Because there's more things happening? What? What's your observation?
Robin Ham: Yeah. Good question.
Robin Ham: you know, on some, yeah, on different different levels, I guess, like
Robin Ham: the front line thing I mentioned.
Robin Ham: So I think that as silly and maybe as obvious as it might seem, it has been quite a radical shift for people. because I think.
Robin Ham: certainly within the existing church mission was
Robin Ham: something that the activities the church did.
Robin Ham: And we're we're basically saying, actually, no mission is also what you are doing the rest of the week. And I think we can see that that is having an impact in terms of the way that
Robin Ham: church members articulate what they're doing in their lives and and their calling.
Robin Ham: Excuse me And therefore feeling empowered or feeling envisioned to think about.
Robin Ham:  the value of of what they're doing elsewhere in their family at work.  yeah, I guess nothing dramatic, but just like
Robin Ham: the value of giving people areas of responsibility. So just saying, Well, you're gonna be involved in actually helping develop this young person drop in. And we don't really know what it looks like, or
Robin Ham: we haven't mapped it all out yet. But, You can see the value of. We need to connect with
younger younger demographic.
Robin Ham: So have a go.
Robin Ham: yeah. I guess that kind of have a go. Mentality is something we've been trying to just on the line. It's okay to try different things.
Robin Ham: Kind of at the same time have a kind of scattered approach to to some of these things like growing younger and and see what
Robin Ham: God does.
Robin Ham:  yeah.
Robin Ham: And and then I think I mean, one of my personal book bears is just making sure people have the time.
Robin Ham: So to actually to be
Robin Ham: in their communities and and so tryin to be.
Robin Ham: And I think that's been interesting, because sometimes that has been saying, No, we're not gonna do
Robin Ham: another.
Robin Ham: I don't know social event, or
Robin Ham: we're gonna not gonna ask that person to do this job. So that because we know that she's really important. They have more time.
Edward Graham-Hyde:  yeah, okay, alright, really, helpful, okay, bit of an opportunity for feedback before we kind of
Edward Graham-Hyde: land the plane, in a really nice area around stories.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Any feedback you give to the to the diocese about specifically kind of feedback that emanates out of your community something you'd like to say back.
Robin Ham:  yes.
Robin Ham: it's a good question.
Robin Ham: This is like feeding. Yeah, what my feeding back to, I guess. Yeah, I mean, I think that
Robin Ham: we want. Yeah, we want, we want to keep freeing people up to
Robin Ham: to do new initiatives.  we. We want to
Robin Ham: part of that freeing. often freeing clergy up and even freeing laity up, is
Robin Ham: making hard decisions that release them from other responsibilities. Whether that is running X number of services
Robin Ham: on a Sunday around the the local area, or whether it's
Robin Ham:  you know, burdening them with church warden or burdening them with, you know this role or that role and therefore
Robin Ham: them, they're not actually having the capacity to do stuff. So I think there's probably something around making those hard decisions and and coming up with frameworks and pathways to allow
Robin Ham:  yeah, churches to change shape, basically, deaneries to change shape
Robin Ham: so that new things can emerge without.
Robin Ham: Yeah, people have the time to allow new things to emerge.
Robin Ham:  yeah,
Robin Ham: and I think, yeah, I think, maybe just being a bit more.
Robin Ham:  yeah, I don't know being a bit more ruthless in terms of actually, we want to celebrate the stories of
Robin Ham: church growth.
Robin Ham: and therefore we need to. Yeah, I guess. Make sure they're being heard, or we need to make sure that
Robin Ham: were encouraging.
Robin Ham: Yeah, we're not just settling for
Robin Ham: something else. Yeah, this is a bit of a ramble, so you'll get a chance to also.
Edward Graham-Hyde: And how could you be supported more in some of that?
Robin Ham: So yeah. So one of my kind of hats is is
Robin Ham: admission community Co leader.
Robin Ham: in the town. And I think that that would look like.
Robin Ham: yeah, it kind of feels like as a diocese was slightly.
Robin Ham: We haven't really looked into the future enough and worked out how to at a local level help
Robin Ham: churches that are in decline and aren't sustainable.
Robin Ham: and pccs that are struggling to get
Robin Ham: people how to help them
Robin Ham: just move into that next transition.
Robin Ham: And therefore what we do with the building and what we do. Because, yeah, it feels like there's there's not lots of pathways mapped out
Robin Ham: to follow. And and the admin, perhaps even the administrative support, isn't there to to make those things easier? And therefore people are more likely to be burdened with
Robin Ham: responsibilities. As yet a smaller group of people burdened with more.
Robin Ham:  so I think the diocese talks a lot about new things and new ideas and a mixed ecology.
Robin Ham: and I think has been really good at championing, championing fresh expressions.
But I think probably
Robin Ham: your average clergy person just feels
Robin Ham: too swamped to to really. proactively give that a lot of time and space.
Robin Ham: Right? maybe that. Yeah, that's probably my take, anyway.
Edward Graham-Hyde: that's fine.
Edward Graham-Hyde: that leads nice beyond to. We might have answered it there. But how could you, if at all, support other initiatives, kind of not necessarily as a resource church, but move, moving forward in terms of.
you know, new expressions, projects, initiatives, whatever they might be.
Robin Ham: Yeah, I mean, this is really live for us at the moment, because there are a couple of churches in the town couple of parishes that are really yeah, aren't viable.
Robin Ham: So having to work this out. So I guess this is why it's on my mind. But.
Robin Ham: you know, we're talking about actually, will. Can this church not function as a parish church, but still function as a place of worship?
Edward Graham-Hyde: So we need to administratively make that really simple.
Robin Ham: Financially, we work. Want need to work out how to do that. In terms of who's gonna be managing its accounts and
Robin Ham: making sure the building is maintained. So that we can continue to run ministry emission in that building, even though it's not no longer functioning as a parish with Pcc. Etc. Etc.
Robin Ham:  and I think so. Yeah, simple. There is a heart to do that. And we're kind of entering into those conversations
Robin Ham: and seeing it more as an of a network or and a kind of a
Robin Ham: trying to grow, a kind of a strategic view of the town that is shared by all the churches.
Robin Ham:  yeah, I think
Robin Ham: you know. And that's always like a it's a mentality shift, isn't it? In terms of kingdom
Robin Ham: rather than just. We need to preserve and maintain our church.
Robin Ham: But I think that's beginning to happen. man. I think one of the again, one of the challenges probably is like that is the
Robin Ham: we feel we've got to maintain a whole range of traditions within the Church of England, because that's what being Church of England is.
Robin Ham: And so I think there's always a rub point in terms of
Robin Ham: how do we? Yeah.
Robin Ham: to what extent is that possible?
Robin Ham: If if a certain church isn't growing, is the solution. To make sure there's a growing expression in that tradition, or do we
Robin Ham: try something different? And those are quite painful conversations locally, and I think sometimes, maybe at a higher up level, it's harder.
Robin Ham: It's a good. almost. You feels like you're reliant on people making having harder decisions, making those harder decisions. But if they don't aren't made, then it makes it more messy locally.
Edward Graham-Hyde: That makes sense. Yeah, it does make sense. Yeah, yeah, and appreciate time is running on the next kind of 4 questions are
Edward Graham-Hyde: all the same, they're basically what inspiring stories about. And then following daily, can you share? And then so on, speaking boldly, you can see where it's going, and happy to go through them. Now I'm also happy for you to kind of if you'd rather
Robin Ham: have a bit more time to reflect, type them out. And in an email later stage, really, your preference.
Robin Ham: yeah, I mean, I?
Robin Ham: yeah, I I'm happy to write because I think that probably might
Robin Ham: off based on a verbal processes. So you'll get the you'll get the first version. And actually, the third fourth version might be better. So maybe, yeah, I think that's probably something I could definitely easily do.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Okay, well, let's let's get that question, then or that series of questions. And then I mean, you can. Also, I mean.
Edward Graham-Hyde: you might wanna also highlight other people that you either think I should talk to, or you might want to talk to them about those stories as well. So that's one. And I have 2 really quick. 5 questions, and then we're done so as part of the effective advances in project. I'm creating a
Edward Graham-Hyde: a database. Well, hopefully, it will kind of met a database. I'm asking 2 quick questions. And I'm getting gut reactions to them. And then I'm basically gonna have thousands and thousands of responses from across different church streams.
Edward Graham-Hyde: And on? Yeah, on these questions. So the first one is, what is evangelism to you? In a sentence.
Robin Ham: Evanism is sharing
Robin Ham: verbally the hope of the good news of Jesus
Robin Ham: with be with people who who do don't know. It makes evangelism effective.
Robin Ham: I guess I would say on one level. God's power, the Holy Spirit work.
Robin Ham:  another level
Robin Ham: people
Robin Ham: knowing and loving other people. So people being known by people
Robin Ham: they know and and sharing in the context of of that
Robin Ham: relationship.
Edward Graham-Hyde: Very good, very good. I'm just gonna do this, anyway.